>> Desjardins: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, MAY 29: AS THE FINAL
PRESIDENTIAL PRIMARIES APPROACH,
THE DEMOCRATIC RACE IN
CALIFORNIA TIGHTENS.
THE FLOW OF MIGRANTS AND
REFUGEES TO EUROPE INCREASES AND
A NEW REPORT SHOWS HOW MANY HAVE
DROWNED DURING THE JOURNEY.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
TRYING TO PREVENT YOUNG EUROPEAN
MUSLIMS FROM JOINING ISIS.
>> (translated): IN THE WEEKS
LEADING UP TO HIS DEPARTURE FOR
SYRIA, HE FOOLED AND MISLED US
ALL.
>> Desjardins: NEXT ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
LISA DESJARDINS.
>> Reporter: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
PRESUMPTIVE REPUBLICAN
PRESIDENTIAL NOMINEE DONALD
TRUMP SAYS IF HE'S ELECTED
PRESIDENT, HE WOULD ASK ALLIES
FROM SAUDI ARABIA AND SOUTH
KOREA TO GERMANY AND JAPAN TO
PAY 100% OF THE COST OF U.S.
ARMED FORCES DEFENDING THEIR
COUNTRIES.
TRUMP MADE THE REMARK TODAY AT
THE ANNUAL MEMORIAL DAY WEEKEND
"ROLLING THUNDER" MOTORCYCLE
RALLY IN THE NATION'S CAPITAL.
>> YOU KNOW, YOU LOOK AT THE 28
NATO COUNTRIES, MANY OF THOSE
COUNTRIES ARE NOT LIVING UP TO
THEIR OBLIGATIONS OF PAYING US.
SO WE'RE PROTECTING NATO, WE'RE
PROTECTING THESE COUNTRIES, AND
THEY'RE NOT PAYING UP.
>> Reporter: TRUMP NOW HAS ONE
NEW OPPONENT-- THE LIBERTARIAN
PARTY TODAY NOMINATED A FORMER
REPUBLICAN GOVERNOR FOR
PRESIDENT: GARY JOHNSON OF NEW
MEXICO.
AND IN THE DEMOCRATIC RACE,
BERNIE SANDERS IS CAMPAIGNING IN
CALIFORNIA AHEAD OF THE JUNE
7 PRIMARY.
WHEN ASKED TODAY, IF HE'D
CONSIDER BEING HILLARY CLINTON'S
RUNNING MATE, SANDER'S SAID,
"WE'LL SEE."
>> SO I WOULD HOPE, IF I AM NOT
THE NOMINEE, THAT THE VICE
PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE WILL NOT
BE FROM WALL STREET, WILL BE
SOMEBODY WHO HAS A HISTORY OF
STANDING UP AND FIGHTING FOR
WORKING FAMILIES.
>> Reporter: THE LATEST POLLS IN
CALIFORNIA SHOW ESSENTIALLY A
DEAD HEAT BETWEEN CLINTON AND
SANDERS.
JOINING ME NOW TO DISCUSS THE
CALIFORNIA CAMPAIGN IS "LOS
ANGELES TIMES" ASSISTANT
MANAGING EDITOR FOR POLITICS
CHRISTINA BELLATONI.
>> Desjardins: CHRISTINA,
THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR JOINING
US.
>> HI, LISA.
>> Desjardins: ALL RIGHT.
LET'S START WITH ONE OF THE
BIGGEST NEW PHENOMENON WE ARE
SEEING IN CALIFORNIA THIS YEAR,
NEW VOTERS.
WHAT DO YOU THINK ARE THESE NEW
VOTERS MEAN FOR SENATOR SANDERS
AND HUGH BIG OF A DEAL IS THIS?
>> IT IS REALLY HARD TO KNOW
BECAUSE WHEN YOU SEE A GIANT
NUMBER OF YOUNG PEOPLE
REGISTERING FOR EXAMPLE AND LOS
ANGELES COUNTY ALONE YOU HAVE
61 PERCENT OF THE NEW
REGISTRANTS, 236,000 PEOPLE,
61 PERCENT OF THOSE ARE UNDER
THE AGE OF 20, NOW OWE HAVE SEEN
SENATOR SANDERS HAS WON WITH
YOUNG VOTERS BASICALLY
EVERYWHERE AND ALSO SEEN HIM
DOING VERY WELL WITH YOUNG
VOTERS IN CALIFORNIA SO YOU
WOULD ASSUME THAT HELPS HIM
BECAUSE BUT YOU DON'T KNOW
BECAUSE THERE ARE A LOT OF
PEOPLE WHO ARE STARTING TO VOTE
WITH AGERS TOWARD DONALD TRUMP,
HILLARY CLINTON HAD PLENTY OF
YOUNG PEOPLE WHO LIKE HER AS
WELL.
SO WE ARE EXPECTING A FLOOD OF
TURNOUT AND SANDERS DOES SEEM TO
HAVE QUITE A BIT OF MOMENTUM,
ESPECIALLY HERE IN SOUTHERN
CALIFORNIA AS HE BARNSTORMS THE
STATE, HE HASN'T LEFT AND BE
HERE HE EVERY SINGLE DAY ALL
ACROSS A THE STATE.
>> AND THE NEW VOTERS IT IS A
VERY LARGE SCALE, RIGHT?
>> YES, HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS OF
PEOPLE AND DEMOCRATS ALLOW
INDEPENDENTS TO VOTE IN THE
PRESIDENTIAL PRIMARY SO YOU
COULD HAVE A LOT OF INDEPENDENT
NEW VOTERS SHOWING UP AND VOTING
FOR SENATOR SANDERS OR HILLARY
CLINTON COME JUNE 7TH.
>> Desjardins: LET'S TALK
ABOUT THE IMPORTANCE OF
CALIFORNIA FOR HILLARY CLINTON.
IF SHE LOSES, HOW MUCH OF IT DO
YOU THINK THAT REALLY WOULD BE?
WE EXPECT HER TO CRUSH THE
NOMINATION EITHER WAY.
>> IT IS EMBARRASSING, MOST
POPULIST STATE, YOU KNOW, VERY
STRONG DEMOCRATIC STATE, A STATE
DEMOCRATS ARE EXPECTED TO
CAPTURE, BUT SHE COULD VERY MUCH
WIN HERE, THE CLINTONS HAVE A
LONG HISTORY IN CALIFORNIA, SHE
HAS A LOT OF QUIET SUPPORT,
CONGRESSIONAL DELEGATION, ALL
BUT FOUR HAVE ENDORSED HILLARY
CLINTON THE OTHER FOUR HAVE
ACTUALLY NOT TAKEN A POSITION AT
ALL.
SANDERS DOES NOT HAVE ANY
CONGRESSIONAL SUPPORT HERE.
SO THOSE FRIENDS MATTER WHEN IT
COMES TO ORGANIZING AND GETTING
VOTERS TO SHOW UP.
>> Desjardins: ALL RIGHT LET'S
QUICKLY TURN TO THE GENERAL
ELECTION WHICH IS SO
FASCINATING, CHRISTINA, DONALD
TRUMP SAID HE WILL MAKE A PLAY
FOR CALIFORNIA AND THE ELECTORAL
VOTES.
>> IS HE JUST TRYING TO SPREAD
OUT DEMOCRATS HERE?
>> YOU KNOW, OF COURSE, ANYTHING
CAN HAPPEN.
YOU CAN'T FORGET THAT CALIFORNIA
DID HAVE A HISTORY OF VOTING FOR
REPUBLICANS FOR 20 YEARS, ENDING
WITH GEORGE HW BUSH IN 1988.
WHEN YOU CONSIDER THIS IS A
MAJORITY MINORITY STATE, A HUGE
NUMBER OF LATINO VOTERS HERE,
LARGE POPULATION OF ASIAN
VOTERS, AND ALSO IT IS A VERY
STRONGLY DEMOCRATIC STATE
EXPECTED TO RETAIN THE SENATE
SEAT, BOXSTER RETIRING, SO I
WOULD SAY THAT IS A PRETTY BIG
LONG SHOT IN ADDITION TO THAT A
THE REPUBLICANS IN CALIFORNIA
WHICH IS ARE THE LARGEST NUMBER
OF REPUBLICAN VOTERS, THEY ARE
MODERATES, NOT THE MOST
CONSERVATIVE REPUBLICANS IN THE
COUNTRY SO ALL OF THOSE FACTORS
THINK DONALD TRUMP IS NOT LIKELY
TO SPEND A LOT OF TIME
CAMPAIGNING.
>> Desjardins: WE WILL WATCH
EITHER WAY.
CHRISTINA BELLANTONI CHRIS,
THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR JOINING
US.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Reporter: MORE PAINFUL
NUMBERS ON THE MIGRANT CRISIS IN
EUROPE.
TODAY, THE UNITED NATIONS AND
"DOCTORS WITHOUT BORDERS"
ESTIMATED AS MANY AS 900
MIGRANTS DROWNED IN JUST THE
LAST FIVE DAYS WHEN THEIR
OVERLOADED BOATS CAPSIZED.
MORE THAN 10,000 HAVE BEEN
RESCUED.
THAT INCLUDES THIS GROUP BROUGHT
TO SHORE BY THE ITALIAN NAVY
TODAY.
THE SHIP ALSO CARRIED 45 BODIES
RECOVERED FROM THE SEA.
AN IMPORTANT DAY IN THE HISTORY
OF WARFARE AS FRANCE AND GERMANY
MARKED THE 100TH ANNIVERSARY OF
ONE OF WORLD WAR ONE'S BLOODIEST
BATTLES.
IN VERDUN, FRANCE, CHILDREN
FLANKED GERMAN CHANCELLOR ANGELA
MERKEL AND FRENCH PRESIDENT
FRANCOIS HOLLANDE AS THEY LAID
WREATHS AT A MEMORIAL, AND
OUTSIDE THE TOWN WHERE 11,000
GERMAN SOLDIERS ARE BURIED.
THE TEN-MONTH BATTLE IN
NORTHEASTERN FRANCE TOOK THE
LIVES OF 300,000 SOLDIERS ON
BOTH SIDES, AND WOUNDED HUNDREDS
OF THOUSANDS MORE.
THE 200 MOST HIGHLY PAID
C.E.O.'s IN AMERICA EACH MADE,
ON AVERAGE, MORE THAN $19
MILLION LAST YEAR, ACCORDING TO
A SURVEY PUBLISHED TODAY BY "THE
NEW YORK TIMES" AND EQUILAR, A
COMPANY THAT SPECIALIZES IN
EXECUTIVE PAY.
THE AVERAGE C.E.O. ON THAT LIST
MADE 523 TIMES THE AVERAGE
EMPLOYEE'S TAKE HOME PAY.
HOWEVER, THAT LEVEL OF C.E.O.
PAY WAS A 15% DROP FROM THE YEAR
BEFORE, LARGELY DUE TO LOWER
STOCK VALUES.
THE BIGGEST C.E.O. PAY CHECK
THAT WENT TO EXPEDIA'S DARA
KHOSROWSHAHI, WHO MADE $95
MILLION.
THERE WERE ONLY 15 WOMEN IN THE
TOP 200, AND THE HIGHEST PAID
WAS ORACLE'S CO-C.E.O., SAFRA
CATZ, WHO RANKED FIFTH OVERALL.
THIS WEDNESDAY JOIN THE
NEWSHOUR'S GWEN IFILL FOR AN
INTERVIEW WITH PRESIDENT OBAMA
FOLLOWED BY A TOWN HALL MEETING
WHERE HE WILL TAKE QUESTIONS ON
A VARIETY OF TOPICS.
"QUESTIONS FOR PRESIDENT OBAMA:
A PBS NEWSHOUR SPECIAL"
WEDNESDAY AT 8:00 P.M. ON YOUR
PBS STATION.
>> Reporter: THE TERRORIST
ATTACKS BY ISIS IN PARIS AND
BRUSSELS UNDERSCORED THE THREAT
OF SO-CALLED "FOREIGN FIGHTERS,"
MEN WHO JOIN THE FIGHT WITH ISIS
AND BRING THEIR VIOLENT TRAINING
HOME.
TO ADDRESS THE PROBLEM, THIS
MONTH FRANCE LAUNCHED A PLAN TO
OPEN DE-RADICALIZATION CENTERS
IN EVERY REGION OF THE COUNTRY.
THE NETHERLANDS IS ALSO TRYING
TO THWART RADICALIZATION AND
HELP PARENTS PREVENT THEIR
CHILDREN'S DESCENT INTO VIOLENT
ISLAMIC EXTREMISM.
THE NEWSHOUR'S HARI SREENIVASAN
REPORTS IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE
SEGMENT.
>> Sreenivasan: MOHAMMED NIDALHA
HASN'T SEEN HIS SON REDA IN MORE
THAN TWO YEARS.
HE SCROLLS THROUGH OLD PICTURES
ON HIS iPAD, FROM WHEN HE WAS 19
YEARS OLD TO WHEN HE WAS FIVE-
YEARS-OLD.
>> (translated): REDA GREW UP
LIKE ANY OTHER CHILD.
HE HAD LOTS OF FRIENDS, JUST A
REGULAR BOY LIKE ANY OTHER.
>> Sreenivasan: THE FAMILY
EMIGRATED FROM MOROCCO, BUT REDA
WAS BORN AND RAISED IN LEIDEN,
NEAR ROTTERDAM IN SOUTHERN
HOLLAND.
>> Sreenivasan: NIDALHA SAYS HIS
SON REDA WENT TO SYRIA TO JOIN
THE MUSLIM MILITANT GROUP ISIS.
>> (translated): IN THE WEEKS
LEADING UP TO HIS DEPARTURE FOR
SYRIA, HE FOOLED AND MISLED US
ALL.
>> Sreenivasan: THE FAMILY IS
MUSLIM, BUT NIDHALA SAYS, THEY
ARE NOT VERY RELIGIOUS.
HE BELIEVES WHEN REDA VISITED AN
UNCLE IN BELGIUM FOR A FEW
MONTHS IN 2014, REDA FELL UNDER
THE SWAY OF ISIS RECRUITERS.
AFTER THAT, HE TRAVELED TO
TURKEY, THE GATEWAY INTO SYRIA.
>> (translated): REDA CALLED
HIS SISTER AND TOLD HER "I LOVE
YOU, I LOVE DAD, I LOVE MOM, BUT
I'M GOING TO SYRIA TO HELP
CHILDREN AND HELP THE WOMEN
BEING RAPED."
>> Sreenivasan: AS SOON AS HE
LEARNED OF HIS SON'S PLAN TO GO
TO SYRIA, NIDALHA SAYS HE
CONTACTED DUTCH SECURITY
OFFICIALS.
>> (translated): EVERYONE TOLD
ME, "WE CAN'T HELP YOU, BECAUSE
YOUR SON IS ALREADY 18 YEARS
OLD.
HE CAN TRAVEL TO WHEREVER HE
WANTS."
EVEN WHEN I TOLD THEM MY SON IS
PLANNING TO JOIN A TERRORIST
ORGANIZATION AND IS GOING TO
FIGHT IN SYRIA.
STILL THEY SAID, "SORRY, WE
CAN'T HELP YOU."
>> Sreenivasan: REDA IS ONE OF
AN ESTIMATED 220 DUTCH RESIDENTS
WHO HAVE TRAVELED TO SYRIA OR
IRAQ TO JOIN ISIS, ACCORDING TO
THE SOUFAN GROUP, WHICH
ESTIMATES THAT 5,000 FOREIGN
FIGHTERS FROM WESTERN EUROPE
HAVE MADE THE TRIP.
MARION VAN SAN IS A RESEARCHER
AT ERASMUS UNIVERSITY IN
ROTTERDAM.
SHE HAS INTERVIEWED DOZENS OF
DUTCH FAMILIES WHOSE CHILDREN
HAVE TRAVELED TO SYRIA AND IRAQ,
INCLUDING MOHAMMED NIDALHA AND
EVEN HIS SON, REDA VIA FACEBOOK.
SHE SAYS RADICALIZATION IS HARD
TO PREDICT OR STOP.
>> IF THEY REALLY WANT TO GO,
AND IF THEY'RE IN A CIRCLE WITH
LIKE-MINDED PEOPLE, THERE'S NOT
A LOT YOU CAN DO ABOUT IT.
>> Sreenivasan: VAN SAN SAYS THE
YOUTH MOST VULNERABLE TO RADICAL
RECRUITMENT ARE FROM TROUBLED
FAMILIES OR BROKEN HOMES LOOKING
FOR GUIDANCE ON HOW TO LIVE.
>> THEY'RE ALL YOUNGSTERS WITH
VERY, VERY STRONG IDEALS.
THEY'RE WORRIED ABOUT THE WORLD.
AND THEY WANT TO HAVE LIKE A
GUIDELINE-- HOW SHALL I LIVE?
AND THEY FIND THAT IN ISLAM.
>> Sreenivasan: IMAM AZZEDINE
KARRAT LEADS ROTTERDAM'S ESSALAM
MOSQUE, THE BIGGEST IN THE
NETHERLANDS.
HE SAYS PARENTS WORRIED ABOUT
THEIR CHILDREN BECOMING
RADICALIZED OFTEN COME TO HIM
FIRST.
THE IMAM SAYS THE KEY IS TO
ENGAGE WITH THESE YOUTHS, NOT
PUSH THEM AWAY.
>> (translated): I BELIEVE
THAT YOUNG PEOPLE THAT
RADICALIZE AT ONE POINT DID
START THEIR SEARCH WITH GOOD
INTENTIONS.
THINGS CAN OF COURSE CO AWRY,
BUT IT'S UP TO US TO LISTEN TO
THEM, NOT GIVE THEM THE IDEA
THAT WE'RE JUDGING THEM AND
PRESENT THEM WITH ALTERNATIVES
AND DIFFERENT INFORMATION.
>> Sreenivasan: IF HE FAILS TO
TALK SOMEONE OUT OF GOING TO
SYRIA, KARRAT MAY CALL THE
POLICE.
HE SAYS HE'S COMPETING AGAINST
THE INTERNET FOR HEARTS AND
MINDS.
RADICALIZATION DOESN'T HAPPEN IN
MOSQUES.
ON THE CONTRARY, ONE OF THE
STEPS IN THE RADICALIZATION
PROCESS IS DISTANCING THEMSELVES
FROM MOSQUES.
>> Sreenivasan: TO REACH AS MANY
PEOPLE AS POSSIBLE, KARRAT POSTS
HIS SERMONS ON YOUTUBE AND IS
ACTIVE ON TWITTER AND FACEBOOK.
BUT HE'S ALSO AWARE OF HIS
LIMITATIONS.
>> (translated): IMAMS AND
MOSQUES ARE PART OF THE
SOLUTION, BUT IT'S ALSO
DEPENDENT ON THE COLLABORATION
BETWEEN DIFFERENT ACTORS IN
SOCIETY, ORGANIZATIONS AND
PEOPLE IN THE COMMUNITY, THE
MUNICIPALITY, THE PARENTS, THE
YOUNGSTERS THEMSELVES, THE
POLICE, TOGETHER THEY ARE PART
OF THE SOLUTION.
>> Sreenivasan: MARIANNE
VORTHOVEN RUNS S.P.I.O.R., AN
ISLAMIC ORGANIZATION THAT WORKS
WITH IMAMS, TEACHERS, SOCIAL
WORKERS, AND COMMUNITY LEADERS
TO TALK TO PARENTS AND YOUTH
ABOUT RADICALISM.
>> THERE IS NO EASY ANSWER TO
THIS.
>> Sreenivasan: S.P.I.O.R. HAS
ORGANIZED MORE THAN 40 MEETINGS
IN ROTTERDAM DURING PAST YEAR
AND VORTHOVEN SAYS THE VERY ACT
OF ACKNOWLEDGING RADICALIZATION
WITHIN MUSLIM COMMUNITIES IS
NOVEL.
>> THERE'S A LOT OF SILENCE, A
LOT OF TABOO AROUND THESE
ISSUES.
AND ESPECIALLY IN SOME GROUPS
IT'S ALSO, "NO, BUT IT'S NOT
ABOUT US.
IT HAS NOTHING TO DO WITH ISLAM,
SO WE DON'T NEED TO TALK ABOUT
IT."
WHETHER YOU LIKE IT OR NOT,
THESE ATROCITIES ARE BEING DONE
IN THE NAME OF ISLAM, SO ALSO IN
SOCIETY HOW PEOPLE PERCEIVE
ISLAM AND MUSLIMS IS AFFECTED BY
IT.
>> Sreenivasan: IN S.P.I.O.R.'s
MEETINGS, ORGANIZERS TRY TO
BOOST RESISTANCE TO RADICALISM--
WHAT THEY CALL "RESILIENCE"-- BY
EXPOSING THE MYTHS IN RECRUITING
MESSAGES AND ADDRESSING FACTORS
THAT MAY PUSH SOME TO BECOME
JIHADISTS.
>> SOME PEOPLE, AND ESPECIALLY
MUSLIM YOUTH, DO NOT FEEL A
SENSE OF BELONGING.
THEY DO NOT FEEL ACCEPTED IN
SOCIETY, MANY OF THEM.
VERY OFTEN IMPLICITLY OR
EXPLICITLY, THE MESSAGE IS THAT
YOU CANNOT BE A GOOD DUTCH
CITIZEN AND A MUSLIM AT THE SAME
TIME.
>> Sreenivasan: THIS STRUGGLE
WITH IDENTITY IS FAMILIAR TO 30-
YEAR-OLD MAHMOUD TIGHADOUINI.
HIS FAMILY IS ORIGINALLY FROM
MOROCCO AND HE WAS BROUGHT UP A
MUSLIM, BORN AND RAISED IN
AMSTERDAM.
>> I WAS LIKE SEARCHING FOR MY
OWN IDENTITY.
I WAS THINKING, IN THE
NETHERLANDS, THEY CALL ME "THE
MOROCCAN," AND IN MOROCCO THEY
CALL ME "THE DUTCHMAN."
SO I DIDN'T KNOW WHAT I WAS.
>> Sreenivasan: AFTER 9/11 AND
THE START OF THE WAR IN IRAQ IN
2003, TIGHADOUNI MET A GROUP OF
YOUNG MEN ONLINE WHO INTRODUCED
HIM TO A RADICAL MUSLIM
IDEOLOGY.
>> I WAS THINKING, "THE WEST ARE
THE ENEMIES."
AND THEY SAY, "THEY ARE WRONG,
WE ARE GOOD."
THEY ARE BLACK OR WE ARE WHITE.
I NEEDED THE CLEARNESS, I NEEDED
THE STRUCTURE, I NEEDED THE
PEOPLE WHO SAY TO ME HOW TO GO,
HOW TO LIVE.
>> Sreenivasan: AFTER SEVERAL
YEARS OF CHATTING ONLINE, THE
IDEA OF FIGHTING AMERICAN TROOPS
ABROAD CAME UP.
>> WE WERE TALKING ABOUT JIHAD,
ABOUT DO YOU WANT TO FIGHT IN
AFGHANISTAN?
DO YOU WANT TO FIGHT IN IRAQ?
AND I SAID, "YES, OF COURSE, I
WANT TO HELP MY MUSLIM BROTHERS
AND SISTERS.
THEY KILL THEM FOR NO REASON."
I WAS ALMOST GOING, BECAUSE I
HAD MY SUITCASE ALREADY DONE.
MY MOM, SHE PREVENTED IT,
GLADLY.
>> Sreenivasan: HIS MOTHER,
FATIMA, HAD NOTICED A CHANGE IN
MAHMOUD.
>> (translated): I HAVE TO
KNOW WHAT HE DOES.
SO I FOUND HIS PASSPORT IN THE
DRAWER IN HIS ROOM AND I TOOK IT
AND I HID IT.
I WAS SCARED, MY SON SHOULDN'T
BE GOING TO SOMEWHERE THAT'S NOT
GOOD.
>> Sreenivasan: SHE ALSO CALLED
HER LOCAL COMMUNITY POLICE
OFFICER TO INTERVENE.
AND THE OFFICER CONFRONTED
TIGHADOUNI IN HIS HOUSE.
>> HE SAID, "LISTEN, MAHMOUD,
THIS IS THE TIME YOU NEED TO
STOP WITH THIS."
AND I WAS VERY UPSET ON THE SAME
TIME, BUT I WAS ALSO LISTENING
TO HIM, BECAUSE HE WAS VERY
CLEAR.
THAT'S THE MOMENT WHEN I STARTED
NOT TO BE NORMAL, BUT WHEN I
STARTED TO THINK, TO DE-
RADICALIZE.
>> Sreenivasan: THERE ARE MORE
THAN 3,400 COMMUNITY POLICE
OFFICERS, KNOWN IN DUTCH AS A
"WIJKAGENTS," ACROSS THE
NETHERLANDS.
EACH IS ASSIGNED TO ONE
NEIGHBORHOOD TO GET TO KNOW IT
VERY WELL.
>> HALLO!
>> Sreenivasan: MICKAEL SCHARLOO
AND JAN POTS ARE TWO OF THESE
COMMUNITY POLICE OFFICERS IN
SOUTH ROTTERDAM, ONE OF THE
POOREST AREAS OF THE CITY AND
ALSO ONE OF THE MOST DIVERSE,
WITH 120 NATIONALITIES AND A
LARGE MUSLIM POPULATION.
>> ALL IS GOOT?
YEAH.
>> Sreenivasan: POTS AND
SCHARLOO TACKLE SMALL ISSUES
LIKE TRAFFIC AND PARKING
VIOLATIONS, BUT THEY ARE ALSO ON
THE FRONT LINES OF PREVENTING
VIOLENT RADICALIZATION.
POTS DESCRIBES FIELDING SIMILAR
CALLS TO THE ONE TIGHADOUNI'S
MOTHER MADE.
>> (translated): WE HAD A
CONVERSATION WITH THE PARENTS
AND WITH THE BOY, WHO WANTED TO
TRAVEL TO SYRIA.
AND WE SET UP ALL THE HELP WE
COULD TO PREVENT THAT-- WE TOOK
HIS PASSPORT, AND MADE CONTACT
WITH OTHER PARTNERS THAT WE WORK
WITH.
>> Sreenivasan: SCHARLOO SAYS
OFFICERS LIKE THEM ARE EFFECTIVE
ONLY BY HAVING STRONG PERSONAL
RELATIONSHIPS WITH THE
COMMUNITIES THEY SERVE.
>> IF PEOPLE WANT TO TELL ME
SOMETHING, THEY HAVE TO KNOW ME.
BECAUSE THEY HAVE TO TRUST ME
WITH CERTAIN MATERIAL AND
CERTAIN INFORMATION.
>> Sreenivasan: ALTHOUGH EFFORTS
TO PREVENT RADICALIZATION HAVE
BEEN UNDERWAY IN ROTTERDAM FOR
YEARS, SOME DON'T BELIEVE THEY
GO FAR ENOUGH.
ROTTERDAM CITY COUNCIL MEMBER
TANYA HOOGWERF IS SKEPTICAL THAT
INTERVENTION BY POLICE,
RELIGIOUS LEADERS, AND COMMUNITY
GROUPS IS SUFFICIENT TO COMBAT
THE GROWING THREAT OF HOMEGROWN
RADICALISM.
SHE ADVOCATES A HARDER LAW
ENFORCEMENT APPROACH.
>> IT'S A REAL THREAT, AND IT IS
A SECURITY PROBLEM, AND IT'S NOT
SOMETHING YOU'RE GOING TO SOLVE
WITH A TEACHER AT SCHOOL.
IT'S NOT SOMETHING YOU'RE GOING
TO SOLVE WITH A COMMUNITY POLICE
SERVICE.
IT'S SOMETHING THAT YOU'RE ONLY
GOING TO SOLVE AND TACKLE WITH A
HARD SECURITY IMPREGNATED
APPROACH.
>> Sreenivasan: HOOGWERF WOULD
LIKE TO SEE DUTCH CITIZENS WHO
JOIN ISIS OR OTHER MILITANT
GROUPS IN SYRIA OR IRAQ BANNED
FROM RE-ENTERING THE COUNTRY, OR
AT A MINIMUM DETAINED.
>> IF WE ARE GOING TO SPEND
MONEY, DON'T SPEND MONEY ON SOME
SMALL ORGANIZATIONS THAT PRETEND
THEY CAN DE-RADICALIZE.
NO, SPEND IT ON SERIOUS
INTELLIGENCE SOLUTIONS.
PUT MORE EMPHASIS ON TAKING
PEOPLE THAT ARE POTENTIALLY A
THREAT AWAY FROM THE STREETS OF
ROTTERDAM AND PUT THEM IN
DETENTION.
>> Sreenivasan: MARIANNE
VORTHOVEN OF S.P.I.O.R. ADMITS
IT'S DIFFICULT TO QUANTIFY
SUCCESS IN THE WORK IT IS DOING
TO PREVENT RADICALIZATION.
>> WE CANNOT SAY FOR A FACT THAT
OTHERWISE THIS YOUNG MAN OR
YOUNG WOMAN WOULD HAVE GONE TO
SYRIA, BUT BECAUSE WE'VE HAD
THIS MEETING WITH HIM OR HER,
NOW SHE IS NOT GOING.
BUT WHAT WE SEE IS THAT PEOPLE
OPEN UP ABOUT A VERY SENSITIVE
AND COMPLICATED SUBJECT.
>> HE HOPES THIS WILL RAISE
AWARENESS AMONG OTHER PARENTS.
HE BELIEVES ANYONE COULD BE
SUSCEPTIBLE TO RADICALIZATION.
>> (translated): I GAVE MY SON
THE FREEDOM TO CHOOSE, I DIDN'T
RAISE HIM RELIGIOUSLY, AND STILL
I COULDN'T PREVENT THIS.
>> Reporter: LEARN MORE FROM
MAHMOUD TIGHADOUNI, WHO SHARES
THE STORY OF HOW HE BECAME
RADICALIZED.
VISIT pbs.org/newshour.
AFTER A LONG DECLINE, THE SHARE
OF AMERICANS FAILING WORKPLACE
DRUG TESTS APPEARS TO BE ON THE
RISE.
THE PROPORTION OF AMERICAN
WORKERS TESTING POSITIVE FOR
ILLICIT DRUGS LIKE MARIJUANA AND
OPIOIDS HAS GONE UP FOR TWO
YEARS IN A ROW TO ABOUT 5%,
THAT'S ACCORDING TO A LEADING
DRUG TEST COMPANY, QUEST
DIAGNOSTICS.
"NEW YORK TIMES" REPORTER JACKIE
CALMES HAS WRITTEN ABOUT THIS
TREND AND THE EFFECT IT IS
HAVING ON THE LABOR MARKET.
EARLIER THIS WEEK, SHE SAT DOWN
WITH HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> HOW BIG IS THIS PROBLEM WITH
PEOPLE WALKING AWAY FROM A JOB
INTERVIEW AND THEY HEAR, WHEN
THEY HEAR THERE IS A DRUG TEST?
>> IT IS BIGGER THAN I HAD
THOUGHT, CLEARLY BECAUSE THIS
WHOLE SUBJECT CAME TO ME IN A
COMPLETELY SEPARATE NEWS STORY I
WAS REPORTING, AND EMPLOYERS,
LOCAL LEADERS JUST VOLUNTEERED
TO ME AS THE UNEMPLOYMENT RATE
CAME DOWN, THE BIGGEST HURDLE
THEY WERE FACING IN FILLING JOBS
WAS FINDING PEOPLE WHO WERE
WILLING TO TAKE A DRUG TEST AND
IF THEY DID TAKE A DRUG TEST
COULD PASS IT.
AND I THOUGHT, WELL, THAT CAN'T
BE AS BIG OF A PROBLEM AS THEY
ARE MAKING IT OUT TO BE, SO A
COUPLE OF WEEKS LATER WHEN I HAD
SOME TIME I STARTED MAKING CALLS
AROUND THE COUNTRY, THIS INITIAL
TIP WAS IN INDIANA, AND IT WAS
LIKE SHOOTING FISH IN THE BARREL
IT WAS SO EASY TO FIND EMPLOYERS
TO TELL ME THAT IT WAS A
PROBLEM.
>> IS THERE ANY KIND OF WAY TO
BREAK THIS DOWN?
IS IT A TYPE OF WORKER IS IT A
SPECIFIC REGION, A TYPE OF
INDUSTRY WHERE THESE EMPLOYERS
ARE FACING THESE CHALLENGES?
>> IT IS ACROSS THE BOARD BUT
CLEARLY A BIGGER PROBLEM IN JOBS
FOR UNSKILLED OR LOW SKILLED
PEOPLE.
BUT NOT EXCLUSIVELY, AND IT IS
INTERESTING.
I HADN'T REALIZED THE EXTENT TO
WHICH DRUG TESTING HAD BECOME
ALL BUT UBIQUITOUS IN OUR
AMERICAN LABOR MARKET.
FOR ALL JOBS FROM, YOU KNOW, LOW
SKILLED AND BLUE COLLAR TO
HIGHER SKILLED AND WHITE-COLLAR.
IT HAS BECOME A FACT OF LIFE IN
THE LAST 20 YEARS.
>> Reporter: AND IS THE
PREDOMINANT DRUG FAILURE IS IT
MARIJUANA, OPIOIDS, WHAT WAS IT?
>> I THOUGHT PARTICULARLY
BECAUSE "THE NEW YORK TIMES"
AMONG OTHER MEDIA HAD BEEN
PAYING A LOT OF ATTENTION THE
OPIOID AND HEROIN EPIDEMIC BUT
THE BIGGEST COMPLAINT OF
EMPLOYERS IS MARIJUANA USE AND
THE STATISTICS SHOW THAT IN THE
LAST COUPLE OF YEARS, AT LEAST,
MARIJUANA USE, ILLICIT DRUG USE
IS UP A BIT IN THE POPULATION,
AND THE MARIJUANA TODAY STAYS IN
THE SYSTEM LONGER, AND IT IS
MORE -- LESS LIKE A WEEKEND USE,
LIKE MAYBE A COUPLE OF DECADES
AGO TO A LIFESTYLE, NEAR NIGHTLY
USE, NEAR DAILY USE REPORT
REPORT IS THERE ANY CORRELATION
THAT LEGALIZED RECREATIONAL
OR MEDICINAL USE?
>> I ASKED IF IT WAS DIFFERENT
IN COLORADO, IS SAY OR
WASHINGTON, D.C. WITH WHERE IT
HAS BEEN LEGALIZED AND WE ARE
TOLD,, NO IT IS REALLY NO
DIFFERENT AND THE THING IS, IF
YOU ARE AN EMPLOYER SAYING, SAY,
IN COLORADO WHERE RECREATIONAL
USE IS LEGAL, YOU STILL, IT DOES
NOT AFFECT YOUR COMPANY
POLICIES.
YOU CAN STILL SAY YOU HAVE TO
TAKE A DRUG TEST TO BE HIRED AND
YOU MIGHT BE RANDOMLY TESTED
WHILE YOU ARE HERE.
AND IT ALSO DOESN'T AFFECT THAT
THE FEDERAL LAW, THAT ANYONE WHO
HAS A JOB THAT IS SO-CALLED
SAFETY ORIENTED, TRUCKING,
ANYTHING TRANSPORTATION RELATED,
HAS SINCE 1991 REQUIRED TESTING
BOTH TO GET THE JOB AND THEN
RANDOMLY WHILE YOU ARE ON THE
JOB.
>> Reporter: COMPANIES HAVE AN
INCENTIVE TO BE DRUG FREE, I
MEAN THEIR INSURANCE INCREASES.
>> EXACTLY AND IT IS NOT JUST
INSURANCE, IN THE PAST COUPLE OF
DECADES, RELATED TO INSURANCE
AND THE LAST COUPLE OF DECADES,
THERE IS MORE LIABILITY THAT
EMPLOYERS HAVE IF THEIR, THEIR
EMPLOYEES DO SOMETHING ON THE
JOB THAT CAUSES INJURY TO OTHERS
OR CAN BE SUED, CAN GET THEM
SUED, THEN THEY ARE LIABLE, AND
IF THEY HAVE -- IF THEY ARE
CERTIFIED AS A DRUG FREE
WORKPLACE, THEY HAVE SOME, YOU
KNOW, DEFENSE.
>> Reporter: THANK YOU SO
MUCH.
>> THANKS FOR HAVING A ME.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR
WEEKEND, SUNDAY.
>> Reporter: ON A SPECIAL
MEMORIAL DAY BROADCAST TOMORROW,
THE PBS PROGRAM "P.O.V." AIRS A
NEW DOCUMENTARY CALLED "OF MEN
AND WAR," WHICH SHOWS THAT FOR
MANY U.S. VETERANS OF THE IRAQ
AND AFGHANISTAN WARS, LIFE AFTER
COMBAT CAN BE VERY DIFFICULT.
IN THIS EXCERPT, WE MEET A
SOLDIER AND HIS WIFE WHO ARE
ADDRESSING HIS P.T.S.D. ISSUES
WHILE AT HOME.
>> HE MAY THINK I AM MOTHERING
HIM TOO MUCH OR, YOU KNOW, AND I
DON'T WANT TO BE A MOTHER.
I DON'T WANT TO BE YOUR
CARETAKER, I WANT TO BE YOUR
GIRLFRIEND, YOU KNOW.
>> YOU KNOW, IT IS TOUGH.
LIKE YOU GET HOME FROM A WAR --
>> AND I AM A COMPLETELY
DIFFERENT PERSON.
>> AND --
>> OH, MY GOSH.
>> I GUESS I AM JUST -- I WILL
NOT GIVE UP TRYING.
>> I AM TRYING, BECAUSE I WANT
OUR MARRIAGE TO WORK.
I DON'T WANT TO DO THE SAME
THING THAT I DID BEFORE.
>> AND YOU JUST BARRICADE
YOURSELF IN A ROOM AND BEING BY
YOURSELF AND DRINKING...
>> THAT'S WHAT I AM AFRAID OF
TOO, BECAUSE I STILL DRINK NOW.
I AM TRYING TO DEAL WITH MY
STRESSORS AND... OR I'LL USE
DRUGS, I BOUNCE AROUND FROM
THING TO THING TO THING TO TRY
TO FIND SOMETHING THAT CAN DO
SOMETHING.
NONE OF THEM SEEM TO WORK,
BUT...
>> Desjardins: FINALLY, TODAY'S
100TH RUNNING OF THE
INDIANAPOLIS 500, AND A SURPRISE
WINNER, AMERICAN ALEXANDER
ROSSI, THE 24-YEAR-OLD ROOKIE
FROM CALIFORNIA WAS RUNNING OUT
OF GAS AS HE CROSSED THE FINISH
LINE AND THEN COULD NOT COMPLETE
HIS VICTORY LAP.
HE TOOK THE LEAD WITH ONLY FOUR
LAPS TO GO AS DRIVERS AHEAD
OF HIM TOOK PIT STOPS FOR
FUEL.
WOW.
THAT'S IT FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I AM LISA DESJARDINS, THANKS FOR
WATCHING.
GOOD NIGHT.